---
title: "Technology and the Point of No Return"
description: "When something already has mass adoption, often it's best to not let perfect be the enemy of good."
date: 2015-10-05
draft: false
aliases:
  - "/notes/the_point_of_no_return/"
  - "/notes/the-point-of-no-return/"
---

At this moment I am writing using the QWERTY layout on my keyboard. My
laptop has provided me with convenient white curves on each key to
help me remember where I am and to help locate a character if I forget
where it is.

Almost every modern computer uses some variation of the QWERTY
keyboard.  The UK International keyboard, for example, is a variant of
QWERTY that uses an additional key that functions like a shift key to
support accents and other regional characters. QWERTY is even used in
China, where Roman letters are used to input a Pinyin (phonetic)
representation of a character or the root shapes of a character. While
languages can be very different, the keyboard layout generally remains
constant.

The QWERTY keyboard was designed to address a technological problem
which no longer exists in a technology that is now only rarely
used. Early commercial typewriters were plagued by mechanical problems
that would make them jam when neighboring letters were pressed at the
same time. American inventor and printer Christopher Latham Sholes is
credited with creating the modern keyboard layout in addition to the
first practical typewriter. Despite popular myth, Sholes' keyboard
layout was not designed to slow the machine down; it was only
optimized to prevent jams.

The QWERTY keyboard was the first successful layout and has since
become the only successful layout. Of course, there were others. In
1939, Dr. August Dvorak and Dr. William Dealey released the Dvorak
Simplified Keyboard, which was designed to have the most commonly used
keys on the "home row". Believing that typing speeds could be
increased by alternating hands, Dvorak placed vowels in the left
hand's home row. To reduce strain, common bigrams (two letter
combinations) were placed where they were easiest to type using the
strongest fingers.

While designed in a much more scientific manner, the Dvorak layout had
mixed results in tests at the time and was never widely
adopted. Though every major operating system supports it, Dvorak is
still rarely used.

This begs the question: if it was designed to be better and more
efficient, why was the Dvorak Keyboard Layout never adopted?

To find out, I learned the Dvorak layout earlier this year. I do not
own a typewriter, so all I had to do the change layouts was to modify
the settings on my computer and my phone. It took a lot of thinking at
first, but as I started to become half-proficient after working
diligently through a repertoire of practice words (interestingly
enough, **repertoire** is one of only five ten-letter words in the
English language that can be typed using only the top row of keys in
the QWERTY layout), I started to understand some of the challenges
facing people learning new keyboard layouts.

I have years of experience with QWERTY. I can type rather quickly with
QWERTY and my workflow with QWERTY is a familiar one. Changing
keyboard layouts meant changing just about every part of how I used a
computer. Without special configuration, my helpful trio --- cut,
copy, and paste --- were no longer close to each other. It is not
until you switch from QWERTY that you realize how much every part of
the computer was built around its use.

Even if you know Dvorak or some other layout, you would still need to
learn QWERTY if you want to work with other people; it is not
practical to expect other people to change layouts whenever you use
their systems and most manufacturers are not going to spend the extra
money to create label keyboards with rarely used layouts.

When it comes to keyboards, it seems that the technology has reached a
point of no return. A layout designed for a separate technology, the
typewriter, is now the dominant layout on a new technology, the
computer. Even if new computer layouts are developed, it is unlikely
that they will become adopted, further supporting the monopoly enjoyed
by QWERTY.  As with any standard, QWERTY is arguably not the best
option, but it is still the only option.
